



Workload Identity in Multi System Environments                 j Salowey
Internet-Draft                                        Palo Alto Networks
Intended status: Standards Track                            Y. Rosomakho
Expires: 13 February 2027                                        Zscaler
                                                          12 August 2026


                Workload Authentication Using Mutual TLS
                   draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-latest

Abstract

   The WIMSE architecture defines authentication and authorization for
   software workloads in a variety of runtime environments, from the
   most basic ones to complex multi-service, multi-cloud, multi-tenant
   deployments.  This document profiles a workload authentication based
   on X.509 Workload Identity Certificates using mutual TLS (mTLS).

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at https://ietf-wg-
   wimse.github.io/draft-ietf-wimse-s2s-protocol/draft-ietf-wimsemutual-
   tls.html.  Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Workload Identity in
   Multi System Environments Working Group mailing list
   (mailto:wimse@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/wimse/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/wimse/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ietf-wg-wimse/draft-ietf-wimse-s2s-protocol.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 13 February 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Deployment Architecture and Message Flow
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Using Mutual TLS for Workload-to-Workload Authentication
     3.1.  The Workload Identity Certificate
     3.2.  Workload Identity Certificate Validation
       3.2.1.  Server Name Validation
     3.3.  Client Authorization Using the Workload Identity
   4.  IANA Considerations
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  References
     6.1.  Normative References
     6.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Document History
     A.1.  draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-03
     A.2.  draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-02
     A.3.  draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-01
     A.4.  draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-00
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   This document defines authentication and authorization in the context
   of interaction between two workloads.  This is the core component of
   the WIMSE architecture [WIMSE-ARCH].  This document focuses on using
   X.509 Workload Identity Certificates as defined in Section 6.1 of
   [WIMSE-CREDS] to authenticate the communication between workloads
   using TLS.

   The use of TLS for authentication is widely deployed, however it may
   not be applicable to all environments.  For example, some deployments
   may lack the PKI infrastructure necessary to manage certificates or
   inter-service communication consists of multiple separate TLS hops.
   For these cases, other options based on Workload Identity Tokens
   (WIT) as defined in Section 5 of [WIMSE-CREDS] may be more
   appropriate since they are not based on X.509 certificates and are
   communicated at the application layer rather than the transport
   layer.

1.1.  Deployment Architecture and Message Flow

   Refer to Section 1.2 of [WIMSE-CREDS] for the deployment architecture
   which is common to all protection options.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   All terminology in this document follows [WIMSE-ARCH].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Using Mutual TLS for Workload-to-Workload Authentication

   As noted in the introduction, for many deployments, transport-level
   protection of application traffic using TLS is ideal.

3.1.  The Workload Identity Certificate

   Workload Identity Certificates are X.509 certificates that carry
   Workload Identifiers as described in Section 6.1 of [WIMSE-CREDS].

3.2.  Workload Identity Certificate Validation

   Workload Identity Certificates may be used to authenticate both the
   server and client side of the connections.  When validating a
   Workload Identity Certificate, the relying party MUST use the trust
   anchors configured for the trust domain in the workload identity to
   validate the peer's certificate.  Other PKIX [INET-X509-PROFILE] path
   validation rules apply.  Workloads acting as TLS clients and servers
   MUST validate that the trust domain portion of the Workload Identity
   Certificate matches the expected trust domain for the other side of
   the connection.

   Servers wishing to use the Workload Identity Certificate for
   authorizing the client MUST require client certificate authentication
   in the TLS handshake.  Other methods of post handshake authentication
   are not specified by this document.

   Workload Identity Certificates used by TLS servers SHOULD have the
   id-kp-serverAuth extended key usage [RFC5280] field set and Workload
   Identity Certificates used by TLS clients SHOULD have the id-kp-
   clientAuth extended key usage field set.  A certificate that is used
   for both client and server connections may have both fields set.
   This specification does not make any other requirements beyond
   [INET-X509-PROFILE] on the contents of Workload Identity Certificates
   or on the certification authorities that issue workload certificates.

3.2.1.  Server Name Validation

   If a WIMSE client connects to a server using a DNS hostname, the
   server SHOULD present a certificate containing a matching DNS Subject
   Alternative Name (DNS-ID), and the client MUST perform standard TLS
   server identity validation as specified in Section 6.3 of
   [TLS-IDENTITY].

   In deployments that use Workload Identity Certificates, successful
   DNS hostname validation authenticates the server endpoint, while the
   Workload Identifier provides an additional identity that can be used
   for workload-specific authorization and policy decisions.

   Some deployments may not use DNS names for server discovery.  In such
   cases, the client MUST be configured with sufficient information to
   determine the expected workload identity of the server and MUST
   validate that identity before accepting the connection.

   The host portion of the Workload Identifier is NOT treated as a
   hostname as specified in Section 6.4 of [TLS-IDENTITY], but rather as
   a trust domain.  The server identity is encoded in the path portion
   of the Workload Identifier in a deployment-specific way.

   Validation of the workload identity may consist of an exact match of
   the trust domain and path, or may follow deployment-specific rules.
   The path portion of the Workload Identifier MUST always be
   interpreted within the context of the trust domain.  In most cases it
   is preferable to validate the entire Workload Identifier; see
   Section 1.3 of [WIMSE-CREDS] for additional implementation guidance.

3.3.  Client Authorization Using the Workload Identity

   The server application retrieves the Workload Identifier from the
   client certificate's URI subjectAltName (see [WIMSE-CREDS]), which in
   turn is obtained from the TLS layer.  The identifier is used in
   authorization, accounting and auditing.  For example, the full
   Workload Identifier may be matched against ACLs to authorize actions
   requested by the peer and the identifier may be included in log
   messages to associate actions to the client workload for audit
   purposes.  A deployment may specify other authorization policies
   based on the specific details of how the Workload Identifier is
   constructed.  The path portion of the Workload Identifier MUST always
   be considered in the scope of the trust domain.

   See Section 1.3 of [WIMSE-CREDS] for additional security implications
   of Workload Identifiers.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not include any IANA considerations.

5.  Security Considerations

   This document relies on the security properties of TLS [TLS], PKIX
   path validation [INET-X509-PROFILE], and Workload Identity
   Certificate validation as described in Section 6.1 of [WIMSE-CREDS].
   Implementations MUST validate the peer certificate chain, the
   applicable extended key usage, and the Workload Identifier according
   to the rules in this document before using the authenticated identity
   for authorization decisions.

   Workload Identifiers are meaningful only within the scope of their
   trust domain.  Authorization policies MUST NOT evaluate only the path
   or other sub-components of a Workload Identifier without also
   considering the trust domain and the trust anchor used to validate
   the certificate.  Failure to bind the Workload Identifier to the
   expected trust domain and configured trust anchor can allow one trust
   domain to impersonate workloads from another domain.

   When a server is identified by a DNS hostname, clients SHOULD
   authenticate the server using standard TLS DNS hostname validation as
   specified in [TLS-IDENTITY].  Workload identity validation
   complements, rather than replaces, DNS-based server authentication by
   providing an authenticated workload identity for authorization
   decisions.  Only deployments that do not rely on DNS-based server
   identification should authenticate the server solely using its
   workload identity.  Accepting any certificate issued by a trusted
   workload CA without validating that it represents the intended server
   workload would allow mis-issued or otherwise valid certificates for
   other workloads to be used for impersonation.

   Client authentication is based on the Workload Identity Certificate
   presented by the TLS client.  A server performing mTLS authentication
   MUST validate the client certificate chain, the associated trust
   domain, and the Workload Identifier before using that identity for
   authorization, accounting, or auditing.  Accepting any valid client
   certificate from a trusted CA without checking whether the
   authenticated workload is authorized for the requested action can
   allow unintended workloads to gain access.

   Workload Identity Certificates are often issued to dynamic or short-
   lived workloads.  Deployments SHOULD use certificate lifetimes that
   are appropriate for the workload environment and SHOULD provide
   timely revocation or replacement mechanisms when workload identity,
   authorization, or runtime state changes.  Long-lived certificates
   increase the impact of private key compromise and stale authorization
   decisions.

   Private keys associated with Workload Identity Certificates MUST be
   protected against disclosure and unauthorized use.  In particular,
   deployments MUST NOT share private keys across unrelated workload
   instances.  Where possible, private keys SHOULD be generated and held
   in the workload runtime environment or a dedicated key protection
   mechanism, rather than distributed over the network.

   This document specifies authentication at the TLS layer.  If
   application traffic traverses intermediaries, gateways, service
   meshes, or other middleboxes that terminate and re-establish TLS, the
   application endpoint might not be directly authenticated to the peer
   workload.  In such deployments, authorization decisions need to
   account for where TLS is terminated and whether the authenticated
   certificate represents the peer workload, an intermediary, or another
   delegated entity.  Where end-to-end workload authentication context
   is required across such boundaries, deployments SHOULD use an
   application-layer WIMSE protection mechanism in addition to TLS-layer
   server authentication.

   Client certificate authentication exposes the client workload
   identity to the TLS server during the handshake.  Deployments should
   consider whether disclosure of Workload Identifiers to servers,
   intermediaries, or logs is acceptable for their threat model.
   Workload Identifiers included in certificates and audit records
   should avoid embedding unnecessary sensitive information.

   Authorization decisions based on workload identity need to be made
   using the authenticated identity obtained from the validated
   certificate, not from unauthenticated application-layer metadata such
   as HTTP headers.  Application-layer identity assertions can be useful
   for logging or context, but they MUST NOT override the identity
   established by mutual TLS unless protected and authorized by another
   mechanism.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [INET-X509-PROFILE]
              Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5280>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5280>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [TLS]      Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-tls-rfc8446bis-14, 13 September 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-tls-
              rfc8446bis-14>.

   [TLS-IDENTITY]
              Saint-Andre, P. and R. Salz, "Service Identity in TLS",
              RFC 9525, DOI 10.17487/RFC9525, November 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9525>.

   [WIMSE-CREDS]
              Campbell, B., Salowey, J. A., Schwenkschuster, A.,
              Sheffer, Y., and Y. Rosomakho, "WIMSE Workload
              Credentials", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-wimse-workload-creds-02, 2 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-wimse-
              workload-creds-02>.

6.2.  Informative References

   [WIMSE-ARCH]
              Salowey, J. A., Rosomakho, Y., and H. Tschofenig,
              "Workload Identity in a Multi System Environment (WIMSE)
              Architecture", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-wimse-arch-08, 6 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-wimse-
              arch-08>.

Appendix A.  Document History


   // RFC Editor: please remove before publication.

A.1.  draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-03

   *  Editorial: consistent capitalization of the defined terms
      "Workload Identifier" and "Workload Identity Certificate".

A.2.  draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-02

   *  Improved Server Name Validation section

A.3.  draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-01

   *  Added security considerations

A.4.  draft-ietf-wimse-mutual-tls-00

   *  Initial version, extracted from the draft-ietf-wimse-s2s-
      protocol-07 S2s draft with minimal edits.

   *  added security consideration for Server Name Validation

Acknowledgments

   We thank Yaron Sheffer, Arndt Schwenkschuster, Brian Campbell, and
   Daniel Feldman for their contributions to earlier versions of this
   document.

Authors' Addresses

   Joe Salowey
   Palo Alto Networks
   Email: joe@salowey.net


   Yaroslav Rosomakho
   Zscaler
   Email: yaroslavros@gmail.com
